I'm not an advocate of people who are in
very low energy expenditure consuming a
bunch of unnecessary carbohydrate I'm
never gonna be a proponent of that but
do I think most people should be
consuming at least a piece of fresh
whole fruit a day probably for the most
part and that's where we can get our
variety I don't think the fact that
apples used to be this big and now
they're this big is like death changing
things like this isn't these are not a
real issue for people who are generally
physically active but if you can't then
understand your own physiology to a
level where you can fix that without
needing more technology you're gonna
fail that's the short game and I want
you to play the long game and that's I
think the message that I liked continues
the more and more we are learning about
physiology yeah there are some people
got a good draw and made bad choices
some people got a really really tough
draw okay what are you do about it you
still have an option you still can have
some control but you have to make that
choice
everybody welcome to hell theory today's
guest is dr. Andy Galpin he's both the
creator of the biomechanical and
molecular exercise physiology laboratory
at CSU Fullerton as well as their
director of sports performance he's also
a former competitive weightlifter and
the co-author of unplugged evolved from
technology to upgrade your fitness
performance and consciousness and
consciousness was the part that really
surprised me about the book but actually
found it super interesting what are you
guys calling consciousness exactly and
how do we upgrade it that's a really
good question
this actually was a play on words and so
there's there's the classic definition
of philosophical what is a conscious
being or was it known but really the
play we wanted to get at with with
having consciousness and the title is
are you simply being aware the biggest
issue we wrote the book for was to try
to help people understand with
technology now we're having a battle of
exchanging our own physiology in other
words we're losing our own conscious
awareness of what's happening with
ourselves this is really like do you
even are you even aware of the fact that
you're losing awareness and that's what
people really aren't even understanding
because with some of the training
technology that helped technologies
there's pros and cons it's not an anti
tech work but it is oh by the way this
has been slowly being taken away from
you and you weren't even aware of that
that's all I want to restore and so I
don't want people to not use these
devices I just want you to use them
consciously and that's really what we
know so how do people begin to develop
that awareness you talked about in the
book thirst and you're like there's a
now an app for that which is pretty
ridiculous you know we've had these
years to hone this ability to know when
to drink and then want to eat so how do
we become more aware of these sayings
and how do we develop the intuition and
the instincts that you guys talk about
well several things number one that
right they're simply trying to be aware
of paying attention to consuming pain
whether its food whether its water
whether it's your physical feeling
whether it's your exercise maybe when
you go to exercise and you go to Train
don't be on your [__] phone the whole
time why because that thing that you're
feeling in between your set you should
be feeling but you're not because you're
now adding external
Mui so then when we ask questions or
when your trainer or your coach or the
person you're consulting with is trying
to ask you questions about how'd that
feel or what did you what went on in
that rep how did that thing go you don't
have any time to downgrade and process
what's actually happening and think
about what's gonna go on next because
you're too tight and you're spending too
much time stepping out of your own
branding your own physiology and going
to the external stimuli thirst same
thing like are you really thinking about
how thirsty you are hungry you are this
is one of the reasons why I like fasting
in different aspects simply because if I
then take you and take some of these
stimuli away and then I ask you did you
notice what that felt like when you got
hungry like was it really hunger you
think your blood crash your blood sugar
really crashed because you didn't have a
meal in 30 minutes or do you think that
you just simply got behaviorally because
you weren't paying attention and you got
behavior they're ready to eat there and
it didn't happen now sudden you're
throwing off your thing so the first
thing would be simply becoming aware of
what's happening and the easiest way to
do that is to decrease the amount of
external stimuli coming in and just
being with your own self as much as
possible and then number two this is
when we can bring in technologies and we
can start putting objective and
subjective measures behind your progress
your performance whatever thing that is
that you're interested in um but those
things need to be in order
the final step would then need to go
back away from the technology and see if
you can now understand the signal that
your body told you so let me give you an
example so you're having a hard time
controlling your blood glucose or you at
least felt like that you felt man I'm
getting these crashes up and down all
day I think it's my blood glucose okay
fine number one step number one would be
that awareness good you felt the
sensations that your body's telling you
that's a start step number two now let's
deploy some technology let's measure
your blood glucose constantly okay
fantastic step number three within B say
hey I am noticing actually based on my
data based on what I'm feeling when I do
these types of behaviors eating lives or
whatever else caffeine stimulants this
is one I have my problems but don't stop
there the final step is then to say okay
come back now can I remove that
technology and match the same feeling
and fix it
should be able to then identify when you
don't have your continuous glucose
monitor on to go hey you know what I
feeling right now that I'm starting to
get irritable or I'm doing this I need
to fix my lifestyle again I need to go
back and I know this is a problem when
I'm not sleeping I noticed this is an
issue I get when I didn't have enough
water today or I had a poor choice in
food but if you can't then understand
your own physiology to a level or you
can fix that without needing more
technology you're gonna fail that's the
short game and I want you to play the
long game that's really an interesting
concept you talked a lot about blocking
and tackling like if people dive into
your world they're gonna hear that not
those words we can talk about getting
back to the basics doing the simple
things paint me that lifestyle
what is the lifestyle of blocking and
tackling so clearly we have being aware
like really stopping listening to your
body figuring out where you're at that
to me is is the interesting part about
wearing a continuous glucose monitor is
to develop the awareness so that if you
didn't have it that you know where
you're at but getting that developing
the awareness to associate I feel this
way and it's in this broader context I
think people aren't diving into that so
what is that blocking and tackling what
is that sort of getting back to basics
lifestyle look like so that people can
you know step in to a life that feels
awesome which I assume is sort of the
point for you to put people in a state
where they feel great yeah I don't have
a prescription to give you for that and
I don't think there should be one
meaning a one-size-fits-all
yeah or meaning like here's the this is
how your day should be set up here are
the routines you should have here the
things you should do and not do not only
do I not give you that but I don't think
that should exist I don't think we
should strive for that so how do people
titrate their own lives like how do they
find what makes what works for them so a
handful things number one against paying
attention to begin with one of the
problems you're having are we sure that
those are problems and then we can
question this assumption so I think a
second ago you said something like okay
I've got my glucose monitor continually
going and I noticed that association
when I do this behavior and my blood
glucose goes out away
well I would actually question that
assumption right there why are you
letting something like a blood glucose
measure control then how you behave can
I answer that question absolutely so the
reason that I do it is largely because I
want to have a health span that's
extraordinarily long so I have a base
assumption and I'm super open so if this
base assumption is wrong let me know but
my base assumption is that within a
range if I can keep my glucose on the
lower end I'm an all peg sort of ideal
for where I feel good and where I think
has optimal longevity and like you I'm
not dogmatic so I'm super open to being
changed so just trying to do things that
I think aren't going to [__] me up
that's why I work so because I'm
constantly testing foods so for instance
sweet potato how does it affect you do
Japanese sweet potatoes affect me
differently than otherwise is it
different if I airfryer it versus eat
them raw like I want to to not just
trust like how I feel but to see like is
there an impact between my average
glucose level and say my H a1c levels
like that kind of stuff that's where I'm
headed with it totally fine here's the
point you have a thesis you have
hypothesis rather right so you have
something that you think is going on
then we can deploy this technology to
help give us information that but we
also have to step back originally to say
okay all this is under the foundation
that you're assuming having a very
tightly controlled blood glucose is
what's needed for the long term benefit
there right well what happens if that's
not the case we have huge problems right
now in this particular case it's
probably not an issue but with other
technologies they can be and or with
anything like this any aspect of our
life if we come back to the original
base assumption let's assume that that's
actually wrong how much of that did you
let influence your life how much did you
let the fact that you woke up and your
heart HRV score maybe was middle today
or poor we actually have good evidence
on this now that oftentimes that can
lead people into having a poor day and
so what I don't want to happen is for
example you check a food and all sudden
you see a little bit of elevation and
your blood glucose beyond what you like
I don't want you then to say oh my god
okay because of that I'm now gonna have
swing today alright you're on to
something super [__] important so now
let me ask it a different way so you
deal in the world of deep [__] nuance
but you also said that you if somebody
bumps into you in the grocery store and
says hey what do I do you like just
[__] avoid sugar and carbs and then
you'll be fine even though you know that
that's over [__] but it's like it
gives them an easy answer that's
probably for a lot of people correct
what are you deploying your own life
because I live in real paranoia of like
do i supplement vitamin D like yeah is
that stupid like are we gonna find out
in five years what the [__] I remember I
used to go hand telling people you need
to be all over fish oil sure and then
stuff starts coming out that maybe it's
not that so I'm constantly hesitant to
go too hard in any direction but are
there things in your life that you sort
of go I'm pretty sure this is
advantageous so I like that question a
lot I think it's very very clear at this
point in movement we need to have a
combination in movement so there's
physical activity what I'll call it
right so just are you burning enough
calories throughout the day and we all
understand now with the change in
technologies how that's changed human
behavior right if you look at the
Industrial Revolution if you look at the
technology revolution the robotics
revolution that's sort of beginning
we're kind of in right now then make
basil amount of physical activity a
human would go through for basically our
entire existence as a species is
crashing to an end in a very very short
amount of time relative to evolution
right so that needs to be replaced
and this is when you see things like a
walking treadmill or people that are
just trying to do more movement right
that's one we also need to put back in
things where heart rate gets extremely
elevated we need to put things back in
that or non-binary movements so yeah
okay that's great you moved up and down
controlled that's fantastic that's a
piece but we need to have other
exchanges of movements I think things
like martial arts and grappling are
fantastic way to get this non-controlled
nonspecific movement in which is very
very important I would argue an overall
physical health we need to do something
that challenges our ability to sustain
output over time do you want to call
this cardio you can I would never call
it that but can you sustain and elevate
it and work a decent elevated work for
now
have curiosity why wouldn't you call
that cardio well because cardio just
refers to heart right and so most people
say anything elevate your heart rate
right well that's anything anything
that's above you one beat above your
resting is in technically cardio so it's
nonspecific it doesn't tell me anything
cardio could be lifting weights cardio
could be going for a walk
typically people think cardio or aerobic
are things that we do for our heart
health mmm or for fat loss and then we
think okay anaerobic things or
resistance exercise or strength training
are things that we do if we want to like
big and buff and over for an athlete and
that gets people doing two types of
exercise I do cardio or I lift weights
thousand percent I fall into that that's
the [__] problem that's why I hate
those labels because we now have people
living on these two extremes which are
good things for you but what about all
the [__] [__] in between and I hate
that message of okay either a jog for an
hour or I go lift weights like that's it
you don't do anything else how much
variety do you do in your workout do you
get it from all this amount because
you're doing martial arts or do you
really like I do BJJ on Monday I'm
playing basketball on Tuesday at soccer
Wednesday I'm swimming Thursday like how
do you and your own life mix it up so I
don't think about the outcome like that
I think about what's the physiological
system that needs to be challenged and
then do that and how do you define what
needs to be challenged like do you have
a goal in mind really like I want to
accomplish this and is that goal so like
to give you an example my primary driver
is longevity with an element of
performance so I want to live for a very
very long time I would not want to be
just like alive but hating my life and
so well let's look at what actually
predicts longevity and wellness Spanish
you said not necessarily lifespan and
these are two very very different things
primary as we understand it now the
things that predict that are things like
your vo2 max this is the most amount of
oxygen you can bring in utilize first
you have to bring in oxygen okay so
let's look at the mechanics of how you
breathe let's look at the fatigue of the
respiratory muscles let's look at how
you exchange oxygen for carbon dioxide
then the oxygen has to be put in the
blood
let's look at how well your capillaries
function let's look at your the the
ability of your arteries and veins to to
expand and contract
are they pliable or they rigid let's
move through there then that my auction
has to put into muscle those are via
capillaries now let's look at your
muscles ability to extract oxygen and
take it up okay then the muscle has to
put oxygen into the mitochondria how
does that ability do you have a lot of
mitochondria do you have for you do they
function well do they not then the house
ask you cause help you go through some
sort of metabolic process that helps you
utilize oxygen to make energy it's not
functioning well then from there the
muscle has to contract all the way it
back up then that goes back up to the
heart so I mean you trace every single
step and you figure out where is in this
chain that your vo2 max is being limited
by it may be just your heart it may be a
breathing mechanics issue it may be a
muscle issue it could be an enzymatic
issue which means it could be a diet
issue it could be a sleep issue because
I'll say hormonal e your your offline so
that's what I mean when I don't think of
the outcome like cardio versus strength
I think okay what am I trying to get to
what's physiologically the problem area
and then address that the other pieces
for longevity are muscle mass having a
ton of muscle mass and having a bunch of
strength is really really really
critical to longevity especially
wellness man within that in my world
there are different types of muscle
fibers so there's faster two muscle
fibers that produce force and strength
and there are slow Church muscle fibers
that that help you resist fatigue
well what's pretty evident is the faster
muscle fibers are the ones that you lose
with aging and the only way to keep
those things alive are to do high force
contractions
you can't keep those live any other way
and so you start saying things like that
and I start saying well how much heavy
strength training are you doing so yeah
you can continue to hack all your
mitochondria all you want you're gonna
be weeks [__] that's gonna be a problem
because you can't move yourself so think
about it this way why is it somebody
that gets gets out of breath walking up
stairs as they get older it's not
because their mitochondria suck it's not
because they can't produce energy
because that's not an energy demanding
and activity it's because I got weak so
yeah your heart rate sucks and your
resting heart rate gets up and you're
out of breath and your vo2 all the stuff
goes down and buh-buh-bah you're looking
at the wrong thing you have to look at
what caused the issue which is not the
symptom right which is my heart rate is
high or my blood this high whatever by
the way you know do you know what
actually regulates blood glucose the
most due to the fast twitch muscle
fibers interesting if I'm trying to
train specifically the fast twitch
fibers do I need to concentrate on doing
a certain type of exercise it's not the
exercise per se so remember an exercise
is simply an external stress it's fake
it's something we're using to cause an
internal stimulus if you want to turn on
the fast with muscle fibers in your
hamstrings and your glutes on your quads
I don't care if you want to do a hex bar
deadlift if you want to do some squat if
you want to do a leg press machine it
doesn't matter it's just simply what
you're using to help your muscles
contract in fact there's other non
lifting things you could possibly do
sing a leg squat perhaps with no weight
at all depending on how strong you are
or maybe some stairs different things
you can do the point is you need be
challenging the muscles ability to
contract really hard I mean if we go
back to we're saying to go like not only
are the faster muscle fibers the bigger
ones but they're the ones that are
better at using glucose as a fuel
soldiers muscle fibers are better at
using fat as a fuel
so if you're having a hard time
regulating that glucose also happens to
happen very commonly in people who don't
strength train maybe it's not just the
fact that your liver doesn't handle the
glucose well or you've got a gut
microbiome problem those are all
possibilities it also could be the fact
that you don't strength train those
fibers are dormant and/or gone and what
we know very clearly is the plasticity
within the muscle in other words its
ability to change its composition change
is really rapidly so if you have a
strength train or not anything heavy in
weeks decades then I would say ok then
we need to put you in a situation which
you're doing something that challenges
the muscle and as many of them I don't
want you to go to the gym and be like ok
I do these three exercises because
you're probably not challenging all the
muscle in enough of a variety and that's
not sustainable over time right so we
want we want variation but there's a
difference between variation in our
training and randomization it's
interesting randomization is not a good
idea there's no plan as no purpose ok
right we want variation so which means I
want to do different
sizes in in different ways but there
needs to be a plan or purpose there
needs to be some sort of progression of
so some logic between behind why we do
it as opposed to I'm gonna do this
exercise today why cuz that machine is
open right fantastic okay like sometimes
that happens but we need skill just I
mean if we applied that to any aspect of
our life you'd be like well that's crazy
same thing with your training so we need
to have someone that can help you or
yourself choose these things in a very
specific progression and variation path
so that we're getting to where we want
to get to that helps us avoid the
overtraining issues and it helps us
continually progressively overload which
is one things we have to do to challenge
the muscles it can has to be
progressively overloaded but you can't
just simply say okay
I'll just add five pounds to the same
movement every time how long has that
last not very right so for you to for
your wellness question that's what I
would say is okay are we doing enough of
that for the vo2 max piece we'd have to
figure out where exactly your problem is
but it's typically in the same two areas
your ability to sustain work over time
elevated work so this is not like can
you go for a four-hour hike but I'm
talking more like a an elevated heart
rate it's a eighty percent how long can
you go 20 minutes 25 30 40 and the other
one would be the opposite of a shorter
extremely high physical challenge so
something like interval training but
really really really difficult so if you
piece that together that looks like a
little bit of strength training a little
bit of interval and a little bit of the
steady-state movement so we would play
in all of those areas in a progressive
fashion in a planned order so it's that
we get all those challenges if you do
that you'd be about as bulletproof
physically as you could possibly be now
what about some of the getting back to
nature stuff like should people be
thinking about forest bathing should
they be thinking about sunlight sleep
like so people want to get fancy they
want to get into the like deep nuance
yeah yeah instead like hey the reason
your team is losing is because you don't
[__] block-and-tackle so lightly
take care of them really basic stuff
first I've heard you talk about sleep
it's yeah like profound effects on
testosterone things like that and I
thought well how this it's actually
really true like you understand the
nuance so much it's so
tempting to want to just pick a topic
and go [__] a thousand miles deep and
I know you can do it but the reality is
your answer to people as always you said
even when you're dealing with elite
athletes you're like I first look at
like the most basic [__] because they're
all over the map I have a couple of
athletes that I've worked with that I we
have to do advanced blood testing things
on the vast majority it's not the vast
majority it is it is not even blocking
and tackling it's you didn't even show
up to the stadium on the right day not
even the [__] building yet so with
the blocking and tackling it's okay are
you consistently bad with your sleep or
did you just go through a couple of
nights of sleep deprivation which I'm
actually a fan of interesting you
actively do sleep deprivation uh
yesterday was up at 1:30 in the morning
right after like a very short window of
sleep or I was still up until no no like
I woke up 1:30 in the morning my day
started Wow okay and moved on I did you
set an alarm absolutely interesting so I
don't think there's any magic to those
numbers what is magic for sleep is
consistency for the most part what I
don't want people to be is slightly
consistently underslept okay it's good
to that's that's a problem right so if
you're my console or your dis extreme
variation right so like I slept for
hours last night I slept 11:00 tonight
like that is a recipe for disaster
so for me is very planned okay I'm gonna
go through short periods of sleep
deprivation and then I'm gonna pay that
back by going through a solid two and a
half or three weeks of no less than ten
a night like these massive recovery
phases we go through and then you kind
of reset a little bit go back so I
wouldn't recommend I think in the book
we go through some sleep challenges my
first challenge is the same thing hunger
challenges physical activity challenges
performance like all of them so I'm just
taking the same thing that everyone
would do with their health or with their
food and say well why not extend this to
everything else the problem is people
will do these short sleep challenges but
then they won't pay it back right so if
you go through short periods say a
fasting you need to pay it back with
feeding right if you go through a period
and this happens to me occasionally and
I'm sure many people that you associate
with where workload just gets out of
control I'm good at that I'm actually
good at people like going
absolutely nuts with work for short
periods of time the difference is that
has to then be paid back immediately
mm-hmm right we have to pay back the
exercise with recovery we got to pay
back the sleep deprivation if somebody
if I'm working with somebody to having a
hard time getting asleep or it's like
yeah I struggle I'm up kind of on and on
one of the things I will do is let's go
through some short-term sleep
deprivation they're constantly
sleep-deprived
hmm so let's make it terrible for a
couple of days is the goal that they
would then as long as their scheduling
it that they would be able to sleep
longer when they do sleep this is doing
a couple of things number one it kind of
just feels like a reset because the next
night when they go to bed and say they
go to bed at 11 by the time 11:00 comes
there's no question like they're
absolutely ready to go and we just broke
that pathway we're out now I wouldn't do
this right before a competition earning
we're closed for the outlets I work with
this is something like let's come back
and do a reset afterwards and see if we
can figure some things out number two
it helps them realize how terrible they
feel because now I exacerbated the
problem so okay sleeps problem let's
goes worse we possibly can
you know now how you feel right then I
don't have to convince them any more
than that okay in six hours
mmm but again here's the difference what
I'm saying right now is plan the
variation not randomisation
randomisation is a problem with training
with food with sleep you need to have
the resiliency to be able to handle I
think in general normal person's life so
like right now my sleep is the
resiliency he's being tested quite often
because they have a child of baby but so
in my mind it's like okay when those
things happen and it's unplanned that
it's not within my control I know I can
handle it why because I did the sleep
deprivation stuff
voluntarily and I was fine I executed
mmm how important is the mind and all
this well it's the whole thing right so
physiologically what's it doing probably
not much what are they doing resetting
how they approach something that's
that's what we're getting I heard you
talking one time about the some of the
MMA fighters that you were working with
and some of the weird things that you
did with them and you were like oh that
may have just worked on their confidence
but I don't care because that's so
powerful yeah that's interesting you
always back off and talks like ah I'm
not a psychologist but you actually have
some pretty interesting insights into it
I'm not a psychologist I don't have any
training in those areas and I I don't
know if what I do is backed by science
all I can simply say is look what we
call in science evidence-based practice
and this is what we hope people are
always living by a third of that
evidence-based science is science right
what's the data show a third of that is
what you've experienced and the other
third of that is what other people in
the field experts you can glean from
when I have an athlete coming to me and
we're working together say in nutrition
I know what the research says but I also
know that there's never been a research
study ever published on a thirty
five-year-old hundred and thirty-five
Mexican pro MMA fighter so like there's
no science on her so okay I'm gonna take
my best as I can with the data but then
I'm gonna take my personal experience
I'm gonna take her personal background
experience and then when she comes to me
and says here here's what I have to do
here's what I want to do here's the
things that I've done the past I'm
running this calculation in my head that
says okay she's terrified of
carbohydrates all right if I push back
on this right now what's gonna happen I
don't know right and so I'm running that
calculation going maybe you know what
it's not worth a fight right now how is
it that I can put them in the best
situation to succeed while getting them
closer to the evidence-based practice
that's all I'm really trying to do is
I'm trying to cut off the the terrible
ideas get them closer to get them doing
better things but this is a process and
any of the athletes I've been fortunate
enough to work with our plans of all
overtime and after two or three fight
camps then I start getting them a
position where I understand what their
actual body does understand what they're
simply not willing to not do or do and
then it's like okay well you're gonna
choose to do that let me see if I can
help you do that better how do you
approach mindset in your own life so for
instance you have a baby oh yeah very
interesting to hear how you address that
do you have rules around mindset like
things that you demand of yourself or
anything like that I don't know if what
call them rules I grew up in a logging
kind of country town my father my
grandfather my mom my every basically
kid I grew up with there was tons of
reasons to lose but there's never
because someone out worked you like that
just wasn't possible and responsibility
was a huge thing when I grew up that was
just the mentality a lot of the kids
that I grew up with would have to go
take care of the animals before work or
they had jobs feeding horses or whatever
and then they did and then you go to
school and then we go to football
practice we would lift like and then we
do our homework etc so like I don't know
anything different I would love to say
that at this mental strength or
something but like to me when something
goes wrong if a study doesn't go well or
an athlete doesn't perform I don't know
anything besides okay Annie you [__]
up like we can do this better this is
this is great and personally I like that
cuz then I'm like yes it's when things
go wrong you don't know why that's when
I'm like off what are you doing those
moments you just you make sure there
isn't something you can't find like you
go back and you look right was there
something that I over missed what could
I have done different with Mme it's hard
because win-loss is not a good metric
right sometimes I did a great job and it
was perfect when the athlete turned this
way and they got kicked or they fought
somebody better than them but that's
just it just happens right it's part of
why I love doing it is because you don't
know there's just way too many variables
so we got to figure it out and so walk
me through that process so the people
watching right now they're almost
certainly not professional MMA fighters
anyway but they're living their life
they have a baby and so there are real
challenges that they're facing they're
not sure what they should be looking at
they they're they bind to awareness so
they get that they're already doing that
they're trying to think through I did
this and I had this kind of thing
they're certainly if they're watching my
channel they're hyper aware of mindset
but like even myself so you talked about
maybe spikes in glucose aren't
problematic I actually that that really
hit me and that's making me rethink what
I should be doing so that's super
interesting Harvey's variability I don't
want what I'd say is I don't want people
to be fragile
I love that but define what you mean by
that what would fragility look like and
then what's the thing you want them to
be not handling any unplanned stress if
you can't handle an unplanned stress in
any aspect of your life and a little bit
of stress causes a big problem mmm that
to me is fragile all right let's say
that they are fragile what do they do so
challenge that directly challenge the
assumption so is the fragile 'no
scumming from the fact that you
anticipated or had a larger response
than was necessary in the world of MMA
we would call this did you did you go
for the feint right so someone threw a
jab at you and you jump three feet the
left you should have just moved an inch
right okay or it wasn't the fact that
you needed to move six feet right
because someone threw a head kick so
this is a problem right and this is just
spending time with yourself right did I
move unnecessarily too far in other
words did I exaggerate my response that
I freaked out that I should have not
responded like that or if I actually
responded appropriately why did I have
such a big response that's probably
because I haven't challenged that
metabolic flexibility is a very easy one
here so I believe that unless you have
an extremely abnormal disease situation
you should be able to handle say a bolus
of carbohydrate if you aren't it's
probably cuz you're not challenging that
system and just to give me some numbers
where would you say I'm no longer
handling it like if I'm spiking over 200
if I'm talking over 110 no you couldn't
put a number behind that because
physiology is too different so you might
feel that 150 how I felt at 200 so is it
a feeling like oh I feel light-headed or
it would be a feeling and a number and I
would say we want to use them both in
conjecture okay right what you say like
okay and I noticed I was at 200 and I
also felt like this and I'm in I can't
tell you one of them is more important
than the other one
physiology is just too different for us
to say it up so I would use both use
whatever ones you want to come out there
but if you say for example had 25 grams
of carbohydrate and you felt like you
got sluggish and you felt your stomach
cramp that's a problem that's not a lot
of carbohydrate in a single let's just
say he was even a fast element
okay so you didn't want to have one of
two options you change your entire
lifestyle around such that you never
ever come in contact with the
carbohydrate or you work on challenging
that let's go for like an allergy so
with my kid right now we're dosing her
with peanut butters oh this is [__]
interesting we're gonna get hate mail
for this I love it already so walk me
through the protocol so any and it's
pre-emptive right you have no reason to
believe she yes she you have no reason
to believe if she is allergic you just
want to make sure that we get some early
exposure exactly okay so how do we start
doing that you start very small mm-hmm
you dose you wait come back
and those dosages start going up up up
up up that's all it is so initially it
was literally taking a little bit of say
peanut butter and it's like touching it
on her cheek okay great come back watch
for a few hours any hives anything did
she get in runny nose couple days later
probably two three days later come back
same thing okay do that for a week or
something and now get some our tongue
move forward did you get colicky did she
have any things like that okay no
fantastic now you start feeding your
smaller amounts it's just simple like
this is basic sixth grade science start
respond like don't give them like okay
change this variable this variable that
variable you change one variable at a
time you'd be very very very slow in
patience it's the same thing when you
workout it's the same thing with your
food like it's it's any part of your
life it's the same [__] system a
little bit of change patients change one
variable at a time track measure
accordingly be objective be subjective
use it all and go over time what are the
protocols is so interesting a scientist
with a baby I've never had this
conversation before what do you have any
other protocols that you're doing
whether it's allergy or otherwise yeah I
mean we do that basically with
everything so we exposed her to as many
things as we possibly can give me some
examples so the son I could put her
directly out in the Sun and we don't do
it and now she's ten months so she gets
a little more sun exposure but I'm not
gonna lather her up and cover her in
full head-to-toe gear and or a Sun
blocking cream every time she goes to
the Sun but the first time we took
around the Sun it was like okay son
okay out right I mean you're talking it
when they're little you
less than a minute something like that
and that slowly goes up over time any
other food the same way I exposed her
I'm fortunate I'm able to harvest my own
animal meat so we exposed her to all
kinds of different animals you raise
animals you find okay and you use the
meat yeah I mean like last year I came
back with probably 280 pounds 300 pounds
that's a lot and what is let's call it a
week average what's your ratio of meat
of any kind including fish and
vegetables I typically have I'll put
this away meat at just about every
feeding if you will and I don't know if
I'd ever miss the feeding without
vegetable either
and I know it's gonna be different for
everybody but I'm trying to introduce
more vegetable variety into my life so
I'm asking directly for myself yeah give
me like some of your top ones that maybe
you're like I eat your kale bok choy
collard greens asparagus like I think I
get the typical ones but basically I eat
green [__] yeah like what else I'm
trying to avoid peppers right now cuz I
have a suspicion that lectins hurt my
joints so what are some like nan night
shady things that I can get some color
in yeah well
the easier play would be to go to fruit
interest did you get loads of Notables
though as being the same as fruit I
think a fruit is being edge
I think it's nature's candy that's the
real just direct [__] statement well
I would directly totally [__] see I
knew that was coming
okay so do you do you think of prison
vegetables or do you think of fruits and
vegetables separate okay absolutely
but put Israel so for example myself or
when I work with an athlete basically
vegetables don't count towards towards
the allotment of calories or carbon even
something like carrots no because this
I'm glad you put this up I just had a
super fiery post about this on my
Instagram a couple of weeks ago carrots
have been [__] bastardize people need
it like no offense mm-hmm and then take
it but people need to [__] read
people constantly talk about how much
sugar is in carb and RNA and carrots and
it's actually super low in sugar it's
just a higher percentage of it it is
very very high in glycemic index but it
is tremendously low and glycemic load
and those differences are critically
important to explain so glycemic index
is a basic basically people think about
this is how quickly will a carbohydrate
or glucose get from a food into your
blood sugar different and it's pretty
high in carrots especially if you cut
them small and cook them right and
you've you've breaking down on many of
the cell walls you're gonna be able to
get macronutrients out pretty quickly
right the difference though being the
glycemic load takes into account how
much actual sugar is actually in the
food and that's tremendously low for the
carrot so to get a noticeable large
response in your blood glucose from
carrots you would have to consume a
boatload of carrot
so that's the major problem I mean just
look at the calories so a giant carrot
virtually no calories it's tiny so how
can I be a lot of carbohydrate a lot of
sugar and something that also doesn't
have any calories it's really really
difficult so you start talking other
root vegetables now those things can be
a little more dense but carrots are
really again assuming you're eating them
say raw and a giant whole carrot it's
really pretty manageable I would be very
shocked if you ate a carrot and had a
any noticeable change in blood glucose
if you do I would say you're very very
very intolerant to carbohydrate and to
me I would say that's a problem unless
you're very specifically say six months
deep into doing a very particular keto
protocol or something like that which is
cool right in that case you have
intentionally going back to conscious
you're consciously trying to do
something over here for whatever reason
don't cool with that but if the goal is
just to sort of be living and a carrot
raises your blood glucose noticeably
you're having problems constantly
throughout the day i guarante you're
probably getting a big blood glucose
spike from protein - which is gonna be a
huge issue right so it's like what do
you want to really put yourself in a
situation where all you can eat all day
is like avocado I don't think that's
something we should strive to is I guess
the way I'll say it so do some people
need to do that I would grant you
probably not what we should be steering
the ship for most people though so
getting back to fruit so vegetables
don't count even the turrets yep
do your [__] reading I'm on it fruits
where do we go with fruits are there
fruits that you think are maybe better
god I try to avoid words I hate but ya
know um well better is always depend
upon context right hmm so what do you
mean by better what's the goal I'm
trying to get color variety because of
its implications in micronutrients I'm
trying to get more micronutrients into
my system to hedge against overdoing any
one thing because my obsession is
longevity and wellness yeah fair enough
but I would still simply say like how
are you using that carbohydrate within
the day so for example like i joked
about this all the time but a spike in
blood glucose is almost always
associated as negative when in fact this
is the most important good thing post
exercise so I would come back and say if
you have a food that you know spikes
your blood glucose it doesn't mean it's
a bad food right this is a food now that
we need to understand when to use when
you're not use like for example if
you're trying to recover from a very
difficult workout and you have multiple
workouts or you're gonna train again the
next day or you want to optimize your
recovery this is a time to deploy say a
fruit or to deploy something that's
going to maybe spike your blood glucose
because that's not a bad thing remember
that system needs to be challenged so
your ability to handle a bump and blood
glucose I would argue should be
challenged occasionally I would
certainly argue should not be challenged
repeatedly or constantly like we call
this diabetes right or the net results
gonna be you become insulin sensitive
versatile resistant right but that
doesn't mean we should avoid anything at
all cost because if you avoid it at all
cost what's gonna happen to that ability
it's gonna go away that's the system
needs to be challenged a little bit how
much how often you should challenge it I
think comes down to the person now what
are you doing exercise wise if you're
training a lot using fast twitch muscle
fibers and that's gonna be handled very
well in a very well processed if not
you're don't so for example if I'm
traveling or have say three or four days
of
basically in controlled work I'm
probably not gonna be choosing very many
high glycemic responding high glycemic
load foods don't eat it right but if I'm
gonna be training a lot or I'm stable
and which is what I tried to do often
then I'm gonna use those to my advantage
to enhance recovery particularly for an
athlete or even myself you need to
actually pay attention to the research
and pay attention to the fact that
people talk about for example fructose
and the fact that it's processing the
liver and that's a problem it can be if
you're over consuming just like anything
else but the fact that when you burn
muscle glycogen you start eventually
using blood glucose Yury fluid your
blood glucose from the liver so if you
train really really hard you see a
depletion in liver glycogen fruit is
then therefore the best way to replenish
that because it's gonna go directly that
that's the pro that's the point of it so
we use this to our advantage people for
whatever reason like to give berries
like I like that okay that's the okay
one but like [__] don't eat watermelons
super high in sugar go look like go look
at the actual numbers in a watermelon go
look actually watermelons pretty high in
the state ID so it makes you feel pretty
full and it's almost entirely water it's
very long sugar so like people just
think those things because they're like
out super sweet and it is sweetness
index versus total amount of load of
sugar in the amount of watermelon that
people actually will consume our normal
basis it's different and and so I'm
gonna add the kid of people who are in
very low energy expenditure consuming a
bunch of unnecessary carbohydrate I'm
never gonna be a proponent of that but
do I think most people should be
consuming at least a piece of fresh
whole fruit a day probably for the most
part and that's where we can get our
variety I don't think the fact that
apples used to be this big and now
they're this big is like death changing
things like this isn't these are not a
real issue for people who are generally
physically active if that's the case
then eat half the Apple making this
Newton slices like that there are ways
we can get around these things without
without getting us there so for you
personally I would say I would start
playing with different fruits and see
how much of those things Act especially
if you have the glucose monitor hmm
let's see there's also ways you can
mitigate that too so for example if you
consume that fruit with fiber or if you
consume with protein
you'll almost guarantee you bought your
ghost response so those are things I
would say play with if you're interested
do I think you can live a full fulfilled
happy life with little fruit yeah
totally
I don't think you have to get anything
really in so I'm not like a not
sponsored by the National fruit
organization or something like that
I just don't like when people get too
far to one extreme yeah I actually lived
my life there for a long time
captain phobia of most everything quite
honestly certainly carbohydrates even
went pretty hard against fat for years
and years and years only to suffer
massive consequences because of it so
now it's like I really am trying to one
hedge my bet with variety which just
seems like a a pretty natural response I
think we have a number of unexplored
areas of food mmm and when you bring a
variety like my mind right now is really
interested in things like mushrooms
things like sea based food interesting
why on both of those yeah so because I
don't think we've spent enough time
thinking about them and that is a
hundred percent why I think we've spent
all of our time thinking about where do
we get our fruits and vegetables and
meat and then are our producible grains
root vegetables things like that and
that's all really good but if you look
at if you question that general
assumption you start stepping back and
you think okay like if we start looking
at all the possible foods why is it
we've decided these are our only foods
okay then what other stuff are we not
consuming that's right there in front of
us and my guess is if we spent more time
on mushrooms we'd start feeling like oh
maybe this is a way to get some of this
variety of five there's a whole host of
things that we're probably not getting
in other places there well then let's
look at the ocean - same thing like look
at this let's look at some of the stuff
that maybe other cultures have used for
a long time but we don't use in our
culture or that we simply are not at
mass scale I love the scientific non
dogmatic approach tell people where they
can find you and engage with that
approach more frequently yeah
social medias these this way so I'm at
dr. Andy Calvin there I am a bit
different where I take basically as much
as my my undergraduate
and graduate curriculum and I put it up
on my YouTube page yes so my goal is to
literally put my entire exercise
physiology nutrition strength
conditioning all my classes up on that
YouTube page so that's up there and I
think it's just Andy Galvan on YouTube
that's all my website as well same name
but I think the way that I put it
together you're not gonna find in an
exercise physiology textbook or a
strength conditioning textbook but it's
all up there for free and you can check
that stuff out cool and I love it all
right if you were gonna have people make
one change to their lifestyle it could
be anything that would have the biggest
impact on their health what would you
have them do I would have to say accept
responsibility whoa didn't see that one
coming
yeah I mean I think that's gonna give
you the foundation for any of the change
right so it may not be your fault but
you have options and that's I think the
message that I liked continues the more
and more we are learning about
physiology yeah there are some people
got a good draw and made bad choices
some people got a really really tough
draw okay what are you do about it
you still have an option you still can
have some control but you have to make
that choice and to me that's empowering
so take more responsibility for the
things whether you're getting your
health longevity goals any of that the
more you could put on yourself I think
the better we're gonna be no dig that
doctor and you can open everybody thank
you so much man guys if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe and until
next time my friends be a legendary take
care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're gonna get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential